                    IN THE CIRCUIT COURT, SIXTH JUDICIAL CIRCUIT
                 IN AND FOR PASCO AND PINELLAS COUNTIES, FLORIDA

                        ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 2024-025 PA/PI-CIR

RE: GUARDIANSHIP AND GUARDIAN ADVOCATE PROCEDURES

         To adequately and effectively protect incapacitated persons and developmentally disabled
persons placed in guardianships; assist the Court with timely review of guardianship accountings,
plans, inventories, and background investigations of proposed and appointed guardians and
guardian advocates; and clarify guardian education requirements, it is necessary to amend the
Circuit's administrative order on guardianship and guardian advocacy.

         Therefore, in accordance with Article V, Section 2, Florida Constitution, Florida Rule of
General Practice and Judicial Administration 2.215, and § 43.26, Florida Statutes, it is hereby:

ORDERED:

A. BACKGROUND INVESTIGATIONS

         1. Professional and nonprofessional guardians may be required to submit periodically
to credit and criminal background checks. At any time, the Court may require a non-professional
guardian to undergo additional credit or criminal history background checks. Professional and
nonprofessional guardians must keep a current telephone number and email address on file with
the Clerk of the Court.

         2. All professional guardians must comply with the background check requirements
of chapter 744, Florida Statutes, and must submit proof of registration with the Office of Public
and Professional Guardians upon filing a Petition for Appointment of Guardian.

         3. Along with their Petition for Appointment of Guardian, each proposed guardian
must submit for filing an Application for Appointment of Guardian and an Oath of Guardian.
When requested, non-professional guardians must also submit a completed Department of
Children and Families Release form. Professional and non-professional guardians must pay all
fees associated with the application as required by the Florida Statutes. A list of the current fees is
available at the Clerk of the Circuit Court for Pinellas County and the Clerk of the Circuit Court
for Pasco County ("Clerks"). If the Public Guardian is appointed, all costs of administration,
including filing fees, must be paid from the budget of the Office of the Public Guardian and
pursuant to section 744.2008(2), Florida Statutes, any court costs or filing fees are hereby waived
if the ward's assets are $30,000.00 or less.

         4. The Clerks must:

             a. Notify the Probate and Guardianship Division when a Petition to Determine
                  Incapacity, Petition for Appointment of Guardian, Application for Appointment as
                  Guardian or Guardian Advocate, Supplemental Petition, Petition to Appoint an
                  Emergency Guardian, or Suggestion of Capacity is filed. The Clerk must ensure
                  that the Application for Appointment as Guardian or Guardian Advocate contains
                  the telephone number and email address of the proposed guardian.

             b. When requested, collect from each proposed non-professional guardian the
                  investigation fee necessary to conduct the credit check pursuant to the Florida
                  Statutes.

             c. Make the results of any criminal history check conducted by the Federal Bureau of
                  Investigation and the Florida Department of Law Enforcement available to the
                  general magistrate or such other person as directed by the Court.

B. GUARDIAN ADVOCATE PROCEDURES - APPOINTMENT OF A GUARDIAN
         ADVOCATE

         1. Any petitioner seeking the appointment of a Guardian Advocate for a
developmentally disabled person within Pasco or Pinellas County must utilize the court-approved
form Application for Appointment of Guardian. The Petition must provide the date of birth of the
alleged developmentally disabled person.

         2. The Clerks' duties in appointment of a Guardian Advocate are as follows:

             a. Accept the Petition for Appointment of Guardian Advocate, Application for
                  Appointment of Guardian Advocate, and Oath of Guardian.

             b. Immediately upon receipt of the Petition to Appoint Guardian Advocate, prepare
                  the Notice to the alleged developmentally disabled person and Order Appointing
                  Counsel for the alleged developmentally disabled person.

             c. Serve by regular or electronic mail a copy of the Petition for Appointment of
                  Guardian Advocate and any exhibits upon appointed counsel and all known next of
                  kin of the alleged developmentally disabled person, and/or such other person as
                  directed by the Court.

             d. Present a copy of the Petition for Appointment of Guardian Advocate and Notice
                  and Statement of Rights to the process server for service on the alleged
                  developmentally disabled person. The Clerk must monitor the Return of Service.

             e. Provide a notice to the process server directing the process server to read the
                  Petition and Notice and Statement of Rights to the alleged developmentally
                  disabled person and to return the Return of Service to the Clerks' Office for filing
                  in the Court file.

C. GUARDIANSHIP AND INCAPACITY PROCEDURES

         1. Determination of Incapacity

             a. The court-approved form Application for Appointment of Guardian must be
                  utilized by any petitioner seeking the determination of incapacity of an individual

                                                          2
                  located within Pasco or Pinellas County and must be filed contemporaneously with
                  the Petition to Determine Incapacity. The Petition must provide the date of birth of
                  the alleged incapacitated person.

             b. The Clerks' duties are as follows:

                       i. Accept the Petition to Determine Incapacity, Petition for Appointment of
                           Guardian, and Application for Appointment of Guardian.

                      ii. Immediately upon receipt of the Petition to Determine Incapacity, prepare
                           the Notice to Alleged Incapacitated Person, Order Appointing Examining
                           Committee, and Order Appointing Counsel for the Alleged Incapacitated
                           Person for presentation to the Court. The members of the examining
                           committee and the court-appointed counsel for the alleged incapacitated
                           person must be chosen on a rotational basis from the Court approved lists.

                     iii. Serve by regular or electronic mail a copy of the Petition to Determine
                           Incapacity and Petition for Appointment of Guardian and any exhibits upon
                           appointed counsel, members of the examining committee, and all known
                           next of kin of the alleged incapacitated person, and/or such other person as
                           directed by the Court.

                     iv. Present a copy of the Petition to Determine Incapacity, Verified Petition for
                           Appointment of Guardian, Notice and Statement of Rights to the process
                           server for service on the alleged incapacitated person.

                      v. In addition to monitoring the Return of Service, monitor the completion of
                           the committee's report to ensure that appropriate statutory time frames are
                           met and send a written reminder by email to the committee member if the
                           report is late.

                     vi. Provide a notice to the process server directing the process server to read
                           the petitions and Notice and Statement of Rights to the alleged incapacitated
                           person and to return to the Clerk's Office the Return of Service for filing in
                           the Court file.

         2. Indigent Status

         The Clerk must inform any petitioner filing for indigent status on behalf of an alleged
indigent incapacitated person that they are required to complete an Application for Determination
of Civil Indigent Status in accordance with section 57.082, Florida Statutes. The application must
be completed using the alleged indigent incapacitated person's information.

D. IMPLEMENTATION OF GUARDIANSHIP ACCOUNTING, PLAN, AND
         INVENTORY FORMS

         1. All accountings, plans, and inventories must be filed on court-approved forms.

                                                          3
Information on obtaining forms and instructions is available on the Circuit's website, at
www.jud6.org. Trust accountings may be filed in other formats but must include the information
on the calculation of yearly fees and conform to the annual report filing schedule.

         2. The Clerks must:

             a. Upon the issuance of Letters of Guardianship, produce a computer-generated
                  Guardianship filing schedule to be distributed with the Letters of Guardianship to
                  the guardian and the counsel for the guardian.

             b. Conduct the statutorily required audit of initial, annual, or final guardianship reports
                  pursuant to chapter 744, Florida Statutes, in accordance with the following
                  procedures:

                       i. Upon completion of the audit of the initial, annual, or final guardianship
                           report, the Clerks must prepare and make available to the general magistrate
                           office, or other such person as directed by the Court, the audit worksheet
                           listing any discrepancies.

                      ii. If discrepancies are identified, prepare and forward to the general
                           magistrate's office, or to such other person as directed by the Court, an
                           Order Disapproving the Initial, Annual, or Final Accounting, Plan, or
                           Inventory ("Order Disapproving") that lists all discrepancies and provides
                           the guardian thirty (30) days to respond.

                     iii. If a guardian fails to timely file the accounting, plan, or inventory, prepare
                           and forward to the general magistrate's office, or to such other person as
                           directed by the Court, an Order to File Required Documents ("Order to
                           File") or Order Checklist for Discharge that provides the guardian twenty
                           (20) days to comply.

                     iv. Monitor compliance with the Order Disapproving, the Order to File, Order
                           Checklist of Discharge, and any orders extending the time for compliance
                           with these orders.

                      v. If the guardian fails to comply with an order listed in subdivision iv., the
                           general magistrate's office or other such person as directed by the Court
                           may ask the Clerks to prepare and forward an Order to Show Cause.

                     vi. Review the documents filed in accordance with the Order Disapproving,
                           Order Checklist for Discharge, or Order to File, and notify the general
                           magistrate's office, or other such person as directed by the Court, of the
                           updates to the audit worksheet.

         3. If the documents filed are insufficient, an Order to File or To Show Cause will be
issued and a hearing scheduled before the Court. The hearing may only be cancelled or continued
by written order of the Court.

                                                          4
         4. Motions for extensions of time for filing any required document must be made in
writing prior to the time the document is due. The motion must disclose whether or not an extension
of time has previously been granted for the same or similar filing. The parties must allege good
cause on which the extension is sought and that the time requested is sufficient. Counsel must
ensure that all interested parties receive adequate notice of all such motions. A proposed order
must also be provided.

E. DISASTER PLAN

         Each initial guardianship plan must include a Disaster Plan, which sets forth the procedures
and plans in place for the ward in the event an evacuation order or other emergency order is issued
by federal, state, or local officials. The Disaster Plan must take into account and reflect how each
ward's special needs will be met under the plan in the event the guardian or ward relocates
temporarily due to an evacuation order, emergency order, or other emergency situation. The
Disaster Plan must be updated if the ward permanently changes residence or if a new guardian is
appointed. Information on obtaining forms and instructions related to the disaster plan is available
on the Sixth Judicial Circuit Court's website, www.jud6.org. If the ward is a minor child residing
with their parent or other relative who is serving as guardian, that guardian is exempt from the
requirement of filing a disaster plan.

F. GUARDIAN AND GUARDIAN ADVOCATE TRAINING FOR INCAPACITY AND
         GUARDIAN ADVOCATE PROCEEDINGS

         1. Non-Professional Guardian of Incapacitated Adults Education Requirements

                  a. A non-professional person appointed as guardian who is required to comply
                      with the education requirement of section 744.3145, Florida Statutes, must be
                      considered to have satisfied the education requirements by completing a
                      minimum of eight (8) hours of instruction and training in an approved family
                      member guardian education course.

                  b. A non-professional guardian education course must include topics required by
                      section 744.3145(2), Florida Statutes. Any person or organization seeking court
                      approval to act as a provider of a family member guardian education course
                      may submit the curriculum to the Administrative Office of the Courts, Probate
                      Division (Program).

                  c. Approved courses for basic guardian education:

                           i. Stetson College of Law, course titled "Family & Non-Professional
                               Guardian Education Program," available at stetson.edu/law/guardian-
                               education or email guardiantraining@law.stetson.edu.

                           ii. Additional guardianship courses may be approved. Information on
                               additionally approved programs may be received from the Program.

                                                          5
                  d. Upon completion of a non-professional guardian education course, the guardian
                      must file a certificate of completion from the course instructor in the
                      guardianship court file.

         2. Professional Guardian Education Requirements

         Each professional guardian must complete training in accordance with chapter 744, Florida
Statutes.

         3. Parent Guardian of a Minor Child Education Requirements

                  a. A person who is appointed as guardian of the property of their minor child, who
                      is required to comply with the education requirement of section 744.3145(3),
                      Florida Statutes, must be considered to have satisfied the education
                      requirements by completing a minimum of four (4) hours of instruction and
                      training in an approved guardian of minor child education course. This
                      requirement may be satisfied by completing the Stetson College of Law,
                      "Family & Non-Professional Guardian Education Course," as instructed in the
                      Order Appointing Guardian of a Minor Ward.

                  b. Upon completion of a guardian of minor child education course, the guardian
                      must file a certificate of completion from the course instructor in the
                      guardianship court file.

         Administrative Order No. PA/PI-CIR 2019-005 is hereby rescinded.

         DONE AND ORDERED in Chambers at Clearwater, Pinellas County, Florida this _____
day of August 2024.

                                                        ORIGINAL SIGNED ON AUGUST 1, 2024
                                                        BY SHAWN CRANE, CHIEF JUDGE

cc: All Judges
         The Honorable Bruce Bartlett, State Attorney
         The Honorable Sara Mollo, Public Defender
         The Honorable Nikki Alvarez-Sowles, Clerk of the Circuit Court, Pasco County
         The Honorable Ken Burke, Clerk of the Circuit Court, Pinellas County
         Jennifer Parker, Trial Courts Administrator
         Michele Emmerman, Deputy Trial Courts Administrator
         Ita M. Neymotin, Regional Counsel, Second District
         Ngozi Acholonu, Assistant Regional Counsel
         Kimberly Thompson, Chief Operations Officer, Pasco County Clerk's Office
         Law Library, Pinellas County
         Bar Associations, Pasco and Pinellas Counties

                                                          6
